---
layout: post
title: "World Bank API Lab"
subtitle: "My thought process and decisions working through the API Lab"
author: "Arda Altintepe"
cover-img: /assets/img/screenshot2.png
---
# Creating the CountryYear Class

In this blog post, I detail my experience creating a class of **Country Year** objects for all real countries in all years and storing my work in a CSV.

When starting this lab, I created the class, as shown here:

```python
class CountryYear:
   def __init__(self, country, country_iso3, year, **indicators):
       self.country = country
       self.country_iso3 = country_iso3
       self.year = year
       self.indicators = indicators
```
## Looping Through Each Country, Year, and Indicator 

However, my initial thought process was to access the endpoint `country/(country’s iso3 code)/indicator/(the indicator)`. I then created a program that would loop through this process with each indicator, sending a new API request each time. I then realized that to actually accomplish this method, I need to input a country’s iso3 code, but to get a list of iso3 codes, I had to send yet another API request with the `/country` endpoint. After also looping through each year from 2000 to 2023, the amount of API requests this method requires is 8 (number of indicators) multiplied by 23 (number of years) multiplied by the number of countries. Unsurprisingly, I found that generating a CSV for every country from the years 2000-2023 took a whopping 5 hours (when it worked). I wasn’t even accounting for the years before 2000.

## Making a More Efficient Program

In an attempt to find a more efficient method instead of manually looping through each individual country, year, and indicator, I encountered the `all/indicator/(the indicator)` endpoint, where simply inputting one indicator code gives the complete list of all countries through all years and their respective indicator values, along with helpful information like the country’s name, year, and iso3 code which I needed to create a **Country Year** object. When first implementing this new endpoint, I did not even use a class at first, I simply sent an API request for each indicator which also returned the country year attributes like iso3 code, and just created another method which combined all indicator values for each country and year. The function returned a single list of dictionaries which I used to write my CSV. To modify accounting for the **CountryYear** class, I simply modified my second function to return a list of **Country Year** objects.

## Filtering Non-Countries

In my final CSV, I noticed that a large amount of the “countries” weren’t actually countries. For example, it was very interesting to see “Middle Income” and “Not Classified” in the list of countries. However, I also noticed that the way the API endpoint ordered the countries was very “nice.” These fake countries started at the beginning of the list, and ended right before “Afghanistan.” After determining the start index, I just removed the first 3135 entries by splicing the list at entry 3136 and beyond. I guess this did require it to be “hardcoded” as I saw the output of the code and manually set the indices to not be included. If I had more time, in order to make it more efficient and accessible, I would first remove “countries” without iso3 code values, and then use the `/countries` endpoint to store all countries with an “Aggregates” value or those that do not have any values for the capital city etc. For example, this is the raw JSON output from the `/countries` endpoint for “Africa Eastern and Southern,” which is not a country:

```json
"id": "AFE",
"iso2Code": "ZH",
"name": "Africa Eastern and Southern",
"region": {
    "id": "NA",
    "iso2code": "NA",
    "value": "Aggregates"
},
"adminregion": {
    "id": "",
    "iso2code": "",
    "value": ""
},
"incomeLevel": {
    "id": "NA",
    "iso2code": "NA",
    "value": "Aggregates"
},
"lendingType": {
    "id": "",
    "iso2code": "",
    "value": "Aggregates"
},
"capitalCity": "",
"longitude": "",
"latitude": ""
```

Clearly, a lot of values that normal countries have are not filled in here.

## Picking Indicators

Finally, just talking about which indicators I used, I initially picked these five indicators:

- `life_expectancy`: `SP.DYN.LE00.IN`, Life expectancy
- `gdp_per_capita`: `NY.GDP.PCAP.CD`, GDP per capita
- `population`: `SP.POP.TOTL`, Population
- `forest_area`: `AG.LND.FRST.ZS`, Forest area (% of land area)
- `fossil_fuel_energy_consumption`: `EN.ATM.CO2E.KT`, Fossil fuel energy consumption
- `population_living_in_slums`: `SH.DYN.SLUM.UR`, Slum population (%)
- `agricultural_land`: `AG.LND.AGRI.ZS`, Agricultural land (% of land area)
- `inflation_consumer_prices`: `FP.CPI.TOTL.ZG` Inflation rate

However, in my first inefficient program, I noticed that the fossil fuel energy consumption and the population living in slums indicators had very low amounts of data with respect to the **Country Years**. It was rare to see these indicator values filled in. Then, with my second program using `/all/indicator/`, the endpoint fully failed to retrieve any data for these two indicators specifically. My best guess is that because there is so little data, there is no endpoint that corresponds specifically to these two indicators. I changed those indicators to “total labor force” and “urban population,” and this issue was resolved.

I chose these indicators because I was curious to see how a country's forest area and agricultural land correlated with other very different indicators, such as inflation consumer prices. I was also very curious on how the land and population makeup of a country affected its labor force, and how a large urban population or larger rural area affected a country's economy. I thought that possibly some interesting correlation could be found with many countries' developement over all years in the API from more rural environments to more urban ones. 

# Task 4 - Uploading and Analyzing Data

## API Key

I first needed to get the API Key, which I first tried by sending a POST request with the required headers to the required endpoint, and then parsing the resulting JSON using "apikey": and "message": However, I got an error and printed out the full JSON response instead, which allowed me to change "apikey": to "api_key" and the code worked. 

## Uploading My Data

In order to upload my data, I opened my CSV and extracted the last five columns from the header (this is because the last 5 columns are the chosen indicators, which is what I wanted to test). I used the following code to initialize and create a dictionary of the values for each column (data_dict). The for loop loops through each row and through each index (indicator column), where it appends the value to the correct column in data_dict. Initially I did not convert the individual row-index values to floats, but went back and did so after getting an error analyzing the data and retrieving p-values. 
```python
data_dict = {col: [] for col in last_5_columns}
for row in data:
    for i, col in enumerate(last_5_columns):
        data_dict[col].append(None if row[-5 + i] == "" else float(row[-5 + i])) #make it a float if its not empty
```
I uploaded data_dict to the API using a post request and my api key, and recieved the file id in return. 

## Analysis

I used the itertools library to store all possible combinations of indicators in a list. I used combinations instead of permutations, because the only thing that would change when the independent and dependent variables are switched would be the slope, but its just a reflection over the line y=x. The p-values don't change, so really there is no point of doing a permutation and generating 10 extra pairs of p-values. 

I did a for loop for each combination, where I sent a get request to the API and printed the parsed JSON output as the independent variable, dependent variable, p-value, and slope. 

In terms of my results, I obtained some that were pretty explanatory, and some that were very shocking. Fortunately, there was good correlation in my data, possibly due to a very large sample size of 13,889 (6 out of 10 combinations had p-values less than 0.05, meaning that the correlation is "statistically significant" in science terms). Some results were obvious; For example, I found that forest area (ind.) and urban population (dep.) were closely related with a very low p-value (around 0.0001). The slope was negative as well, meaning that as a country's forest area increased, the urban population was found to decrease. This makes sense, as the more forest area a country has, the less room it would have to build cities, and the population of people living in those cities would probably be less than a country with more room to build cities. Additionally, as the forest area of a country grew, the agricultural land decreased as well, which also makes sense as there would be less room for agriculture and less trees chopped down (This had a p-value of 0.0). Finally, as the urban population of a country increased, the agricultural land decreased (p-value 0.0), which could also make sense as the economy of that country could focus less on agriculture and more on industrialism and urbanism.

Now for the unexpected results: I was very surprised to see that as the urban population of a country increased, the total labor force decreased (p-value 0.0007), which makes no sense to me whatsoever. I would expect the opposite, a country with a large urban population should (in my opinion) also have a larger total labor force. The only possible explanation I can think of would be that countries with more rural populations could require more labor to keep them going, and a larger percentage would work, but this still doesn't really make sense to me. I also found that as the forest area of a country increased, the labor force decreased, which makes far more sense as people aren't really living in the forests, resulting in a lower labor force. One really interesting result was that with p-value 0.01, an increase in forest area was correlated to an increase in inflation consumer prices. I don't have much explanation for this, possibly one being that countries with large forest areas could have less stable economies due to having a lower total labor force, leading to an increase in inflation. I found it really interesting how two seemingly unrelated indicators, like forest area and inflation consumer prices, could still have a strong correlation. I think this really shows the influence and power of APIs and having access to large amounts of data to create unique connections that would be impossible to see otherwise. 

In conclusion, I created a program that retrieves indicator data on every valid country for every year that data was collected. I wanted the most amount of data points as possible for testing for correlation, and I believed that testing for all years and all valid countries is the best way to do this. I found some interesting correlation that was both obvious and also very surprising. Who knew that forest area could influence inflation? 
